[fire crackling]
♪ ♪
‐ Tonight, for the first time,
seven past competitors
walk back into The Forge
in hopes of rewriting history.
If you want redemption,
you're gonna have to fight
six other smiths to get it.
During the next two weeks
a long and winding road
to redemption
testing every aspect
of our competitors'
bladesmithing capabilities.
And we're not gonna make it
easy for you.
One of you will be dismissed
on the spot.
With $20,000 on the line,
this will be the most grueling
challenge yet.
‐ See, that is what we
did not want there.
‐ And it's all or nothing
for these seven
contenders' redemption.
Matt Berry advanced to
the final round
of testing with
his Maasai spear.
But his weapon failed at
the most critical moment.
‐ So, being here for redemption
is kinda like
doubling down on your bet.
Because if you lost
the first time
and you come back and you lose
the second time,
well, okay, yeah.
You're a loser.
You confirmed it. [laughs]
‐ David Sowards‐Emmerd's
slasher fell victim
to a freak accident
on the forge floor.
[clanging]
And it never made it
to testing.
‐ From the second I left
The Forge,
I was really hoping
I could come back
for a redemption round,
and for me, it's
important to come back
just to be able
to show what I can do.
‐ Rae Lynn Vander Weide
got her signature blade
into the quench in time.
It still didn't measure up.
‐ Your blade failed to meet
parameters.
‐ My family gave me hell
and teased me a little bit
for losing in the first round.
So‐‐but I definitely want
the last laugh
when it comes to my family.
‐ Chris Price was contending
with a broken heart.
‐ The first time I competed
here was the first thing
I'd done after I lost my wife
to breast cancer.
‐ Chris, your blade did not
make the cut.
‐ Understood.
[shouts]
When I didn't win,
it was just one loss piled
on top of another.
This time I'm coming
from a much better place,
and I want to win.
‐ Aaron Morrison lost focus
while making a hatchet.
‐ I'm the only bladesmith
in the entire "Forged in Fire"
history
to bust parameters
in round one...
Uh‐oh.
And round two.
‐ It's a little bit
disappointing from somebody
who has so much talent.
‐ I am here to prove
to my family
and my friends and coworkers
that I can to read
a tape measure
and that it was just
a easy mistake
that could happen to anybody.
‐ Marc Setzer ran off
the rails
trying to craft
his signature blade
at the 3‐inch ball bearing.
‐ That ball bearing beat me up
pretty good.
‐ Marc, your blade didn't make
the cut.
‐ I want another shot.
I don't think I had
a chance to really show
what I could do the last time,
and I think I can now.
‐ Finally, Zack Lewis rallied
from a major curve ball
to come within a hair
of winning.
‐ My first time on
"Forged in Fire"
was definitely stressful.
I mean, I entered as a master
and apprentice duo,
and then my master,
um, had a family emergency
he had to step out for.
So, it was definitely
a challenge having
to finish
that entire second round
and the Home Forge
all by myself.
‐ Zack, you got the heart
of a lion, brother,
but at this time I have
to ask you to please
surrender your weapon.
‐ Two weeks, seven smiths,
five grueling challenges,
$20,000.
The "Forged in Fire: Long Road
to Redemption" starts here.
♪ ♪
[tense music]
Bladesmiths, welcome back to
The Forge.
It's good to see you all again.
The seven of you have come here
seeking redemption.
If you want redemption,
you're gonna have to fight
six other smiths to get it.
All in front of a panel of
expert judges that determines
which of you will be
a "Forged in Fire" champion
and leave here with a check
for $20,000.
Up first, ABS Mastersmith,
J. Neilson.
Two‐time "Forged in Fire"
champion, Ben Abbott.
And last, edged‐weapons
specialist, Doug Marcaida.
Bladesmiths, we're going back
to basics
here in the first round.
Today we'll be using these.
[ominous music]
♪ ♪
Coal forges.
Nothing's more basic
than forging steel
using a coal forge.
Except, however,
what's underneath
the cloth on your anvil.
♪ ♪
That's a piece of
1095 bar stock mono steel.
By the end of this round,
you must have
a throwing knife
with a blade length
between 7 and 9 inches,
the overall length must not
exceed 22 inches.
‐ I don't work with
a coal forge very often.
So, trying to get
my heat correct,
not burning up my steel.
Also, I've never made
a throwing knife before.
This is an intense challenge.
‐ Bladesmiths, you'll have
three hours in which
to perform this challenge.
At the end of this three hours,
your work
will be inspected,
and one of you
will be eliminated on the spot
without ever getting
into The Forge.
The six of you that remain
would move on
to weapons testing.
So, your blades need
to be functional
by the end of this round.
‐ There's no second chances,
no second round.
There's no opportunities
to fix your cracks
or fix your blade.
There's one round to make
a testable blade,
which is gonna be tough.
‐ Good luck, bladesmiths.
Your time starts now.
[rock music]
All right, so in this
two‐part road to redemption,
we doubled down on
the prize money,
but we also doubled down
on the challenges.
There are five of them,
and they're punishing.
Let's talk about these
coal forges.
‐ You want nice,
intense flames.
But the coal forges we have,
it's not like the propane,
where you've got a length that
will heat up fairly evenly.
You've got maybe about
4 to 6 inches of area
that's gonna heat up.
‐ So, somebody who
just forges with propane
is really at a disadvantage
in a competition like this.
‐ Yeah, this is a whole
different animal.
♪ ♪
‐ So, we got tossed
a challenge.
Make a throwing knife,
make it on a coal forge,
make it outside.
I've never made
a throwing knife.
I've never thrown
‐ Once they get the fire going
that big challenge
is gonna be that
1‐inch square 10 series.
They're gonna mash that down
into a balanced throwing knife.
♪ ♪
‐ Now that my fire's going
nice and strong,
I put my blade steel
in there.
‐ He's got a fire source,
now it's just controlling
that heat.
'Cause a lot of times if you
don't control that heat,
it'll burn your metal.
‐ Keep it up on high,
get your fire built up,
get your center core heated up,
then back it off,
and just keep a minimum
steady flow.
♪ ♪
‐ Well, I've done coal forging,
but I stopped,
like, 25 years ago.
So, I kinda remember
how to do it, I think.
♪ ♪
‐ [laughs]
Check out Matt over here.
He's actually poured
the water into his mouth
and he's spitting it onto
his fire
like a‐‐a more controlled
stream.
‐ Like a mommy‐bird.
‐ [laughs]
‐ When you're forging,
you're really aiming to get
your steel between, like,
1,500 and 2,000 degrees.
But the coal forge feels
really hot,
might hit 3,000 degrees,
so you gotta be careful.
♪ ♪
‐ I totally feel like
I'm in my element.
I grew up on a coal forge.
I blew it last time over
a stupid mistake.
I need this redemption.
‐ There's a problem here.
‐ You now have
the dubious distinction
of being the only bladesmith
to blow the parameters
in both rounds.
‐ I'm here to prove what
I can do
and to display that I have
the confidence
to hang with the big dogs.
♪ ♪
[exciting music]
‐ I know this is
way more steel than I need
to make a 7 to 9‐inch blade,
so I just chopped off
about 3 inches.
♪ ♪
‐ Now David's just working
with that little stub of steel,
and it's turning gray
very quickly.
‐ I'm not working the steel
as hot as I could.
I'm working couple inch pieces
at a time,
'cause that's all that's
getting hot
and that's all that's
staying hot.
That's gonna make
it even more physical,
because I'm not gonna
heat it up like I would
in a propane forge just to be
on the safe side.
♪ ♪
[tense music]
‐ What makes bar stock
this size hard
to work is it's dense.
This is going to be very
physically demanding,
but I gotta get it done.
Ah, and I ate my metal.
That's fine, I'll make it work.
‐ I just realized
she burned it.
‐ There's a lot of stuff
coming off
her raised steel there.
‐ Last time I was on
"Forged in Fire,"
I lost a good chunk
of my bar stock,
which was what unfortunately
sent me home.
♪ ♪
‐ Ah, damn it, I lost my weld.
‐ Ooh.
‐ Rae's steel just came apart.
[blasting]
‐ Rae's over here cutting off
the end of her billet.
‐ This is not as bad
as last time.
I can afford to get rid of
this little piece.
I just have to be careful
not to let it happen again,
because I can't afford to lose
anymore bar stock.
♪ ♪
‐ I started forging out
my billet.
I found my groove.
I think I'm doing
pretty good right now.
‐ This is a blade that lends
itself to hammer finish,
because there's
not much slicing
that a throwing knife
is supposed to do.
It just needs a nice, strong,
stealth point
to the end of it.
♪ ♪
‐ [bleep]
‐ Oh, my gosh.
Marc was hitting his billet
and the end fell off.
‐ At those elevated
temperatures,
the grain is growing so fast
that it becomes brittle
even under the heat.
‐ I think they gave me plenty
of steel to make up for it,
but I just gotta watch
my steel.
[rock music]
‐ 12 hours after losing
"Forged in Fire,"
I got married.
Since then I've had a son,
started my own ostrich ranch,
and now there's only one thing
left in my life and that's
"Forged in Fire" championship.
That'll make me complete.
♪ ♪
[bleep]
‐ Zack lost a bit of his billet
from overheating.
‐ One of the biggest things
is you can't see
what's going on.
In a propane forge,
you can look straight in,
look straight at your steel.
Here, the coal
is masking everything.
‐ That's where we get a lot
of people overheating
their steel and burning it up.
‐ Definitely ruined the first
2 inches of this bar.
So, I'm just gonna cut off
about a 1/4‐inch past
where I think those cracks
will be.
Hopefully I'll be able to
keep working this
and be able to make
a knife forms.
‐ Bladesmiths,
one hour has elapsed.
♪ ♪
‐ Now that my fire's going
nice and strong,
this steel starts to take
a little bit of shape,
but it's not easy.
I'm trying to make all
the best adjustments
I can to keep it in balance.
‐ Generally speaking on
throwing knives, you want
a little bit of weight
forward to back,
so the center of gravity
is forward
of the center of the knife.
And it just lends itself
to a good throw.
‐ Do you throw from the blade
or from the handle?
‐ Usually from the handle.
It makes it fly out of
your hand nice and easy.
‐ Right, so that's why
the handles
on most throwing knives
are bare metal
with no handle material
attached.
It unloads better.
♪ ♪
‐ [laughs]
‐ My arms are getting
really tired,
and I think it's just
a good idea to take a moment
to do some light exercise.
Gotta stretch,
gotta stay limber.
No better place to work out
then on "Forged in Fire."
Welcome to the gun show.
‐ To the gun show.
[laughs]
♪ ♪
With it being cold outside,
it's gonna suck a lot more heat
out of my blade,
which means I have to work
on it in shorter periods
of time.
I put I back into the fire
getting less done than
what I had wanted to.
This steel is kind of suck‐ish
to try to move,
but I'm using the foot
of the anvil pretty good.
[coughs, laughs]
♪ ♪
‐ The material
is 1‐inch square 1095,
which has a lot of carbon,
it's a bit harder to move.
I don't hammer that,
I put that in the power hammer.
My arm's 55, I don't know if
I'm gonna make it.
All that hammering was
a little bit taxing
and damaging to my hand,
but I survived worse.
‐ Ah.
Ooh.
Pain is temporary, and I've got
beers coming tonight.
[laughs]
♪ ♪
So, I'm working the stock,
and I'm kinda fiddling
with the fire
and I'm not sure what's
going on with it
and I lit my steel on fire.
Oh.
Aw, you idiot.
This is a newbie mistake.
I shouldn't be doing this.
‐ [groans]
‐ [bleep]
Well, I burned off 3 inches.
Just thinking, like,
"Oh, yeah.
Yeah, you're done."
♪ ♪
inches.
‐ One of the things that
I've learned about coal forging
is that it is easy to
super heat your steel.
Matt's steel burned up,
Marc, Rae, Zack;
and the structural integrity
of several of these blades
has been in question.
‐ [bleep]
Problem is, now I lit the end
on fire,
that steel is absolutely
useless.
So, I've gotta get rid of it.
♪ ♪
[saw blasting]
‐ Wow, Matt has a very short
piece of steel now.
‐ It's gonna be difficult
to pull off,
but I'm just gonna keep going
till Wil says,
"Put your hammers down."
‐ Bladesmiths,
90 minutes has elapsed.
♪ ♪
‐ I got my new blade formed,
it's time to start working on
my handle.
I'm working along at
a pretty decent pace.
I've built my fire up,
and I take just a little
too long to get my steel out.
♪ ♪
[bleep]
About 2 inches of my handle
is gone.
I got an idea, though.
I'm going to weld
a piece of mild on
to make the rest of my handle.
I'm gonna go dive
into the scrap pile
and see what I can find.
It has to be the right size
and it has to give me
the balance I'm looking for.
‐ I think Marc did
a smart thing about welding
a piece of mild steel
for the handle.
We thought he was gonna
come up short
if he didn't do something
like that.
‐ I'm just worried
if they throw the blade
and it hits handle first
and the handle comes
flying off, that's it.
Catastrophic failure.
[rock music]
‐ Unfortunately, it feels like
I'm not moving anywhere.
♪ ♪
Whew.
My hand starts to get tired,
and I start losing my grip
every now and then.
♪ ♪
No.
‐ Rae needs to get on it.
She cannot let her steel
cool down like that.
But I think that initial
overheat kind for Rae
has maybe, like, scared her
a little bit
away from the fire.
‐ Absolutely.
‐ I just gotta find
that sweet spot
and I gotta hold onto it
and just gotta keep going.
♪ ♪
‐ I have got a blade that's
starting to look like a blade.
The end is in sight.
‐ David's got a decent shape
going on,
but he doesn't have
a lot of steel there.
‐ Uh, I haven't seen
any sparks yet,
but pretty much
the same place I was
when I had a failure last time.
I'm forging a lot slower than
I usually would,
but I gotta play it safe.
‐ One hour, bladesmiths.
You have one hour remaining
to finish your blades.
♪ ♪
‐ So, I'm drawing out
this billet,
it's looking pretty nice.
Oh, [bleep] me right.
Cracks right in the center
of my blade.
Dude.
Do I continue and try
and weld off a little piece?
Or these cracks are gonna
continue up this handle
all the way.
[bleep]
I think this billet is toast.
Time to start
a brand new blade.
‐ Zack has had to start
all over again.
His steel burned up.
‐ Oh, poor Zack.
‐ It's a huge crunch.
I don't know if I'm even
gonna be able to draw
that bar out
to workable stock,
but I'm gonna give it
everything I got.
I'm gonna do this.
Why?
‐ You can do it, man.
‐ I'm trying.
‐ You can do it, bro.
Get it‐‐here.
‐ Thanks, Aaron.
‐ You're welcome.
♪ ♪
‐ It's been good to watch
Aaron.
He's making a lot of progress.
He's got
a decent‐looking shape,
but it just needs refining.
‐ Time is ticking down,
and I wanna make sure
that I'm within parameters.
I'm gonna measure the piss
out of everything.
‐ None of these smiths should
go home on parameters today.
‐ No, you would think after
being here once already,
parameters would be burned
into their heads.
‐ The parameters are, um, a...
Oh. [laughs]
I swear I know 'em.
I swear I know the parameters.
♪ ♪
‐ Chris has the thinnest blade,
but it's well‐shaped.
‐ I'm going to do
some heat treatment soon.
I should be okay.
If I don't get this blade
hot enough,
it's not gonna harden
quick enough,
and it's not gonna stand up
for testing.
♪ ♪
Now that I've hardened
my knife,
I use my quenching plates
to make sure
that thing is dead flat.
‐ Chris just put his blade
between‐‐looks like
two big pieces of aluminum.
‐ They're just two giant slabs
of aluminum
that help me make sure that
whatever I quench
comes out straight.
I pull my knife out,
it looks perfect.
♪ ♪
‐ I'm taking my time
on heating up
my blade for the quench.
I am not dropping this blade
in that quench tank.
‐ Guess you dropped
from last time.
‐ That's exactly what happened.
‐ Ah, man.
♪ ♪
‐ Oh, no.
‐ Everybody in my hometown
has been picking on me
about swimming
in the quench tank.
♪ ♪
‐ Marc just quenched
right there.
‐ I pulled it out of
the quench, held on to it...
I feel like I got it hardened.
Now it's time to grind.
♪ ♪
The more I grind,
the more micro cracks
that I see.
There is one midway down
the edge of my blade
that doesn't look like
it's just gonna be surface.
I gotta take this to
the welder.
[zapping]
I'm throwing a bead right on
the crack itself.
Hoping to get enough
penetration that
I can stop it from breaking.
‐ 2 1/2 hours has elapsed,
you have just 30 minutes
remaining.
[tense music]
Matt has had problems
continuously.
He's come out with a very long
and thin blade.
‐ The only part
that really matters
is the tip,
and I have no time.
So, I'm really just
gonna worry about getting
that last 3 inches hard.
♪ ♪
There's no cracking,
and so I'm pretty happy.
But I just don't know
what flaws I introduced
by setting it on fire.
[metal clanging]
♪ ♪
‐ Got the blade shaped
the way I want it,
and I'm happy with it,
so it's time
to clean it up a little bit
and go to the quench.
♪ ♪
‐ David's quenching right now.
‐ Looks fairly straight,
everything's going good.
[saw blasting]
‐ Ten minutes!
[rock music]
‐ Rae still has a very, very
thick chunk of metal
with a tip on it.
‐ I'm just pouring coal onto
that forge
to get my blade hot
as possible.
I am gonna make this
by the skin of my teeth.
♪ ♪
I don't have a lot of time,
so I run over to the grinder
just to do some final
detailing touches.
‐ Rae over there grinding
for all she's worth.
Come on, Rae!
‐ I wanna see if I can get it
still a little bit thinner
with that grinder.
[grinder buzzing]
♪ ♪
‐ Zack is desperately working
to finish his shape
that he can turn in to even be
considered for moving forward.
‐ It's a race to the finish,
and it doesn't even matter
if this isn't
the best blade I can produce.
I just need to get something.
‐ Now, Zack racing from
one side of The Forge
to the other.
Still has to quench that blade.
♪ ♪
One minute.
‐ Not sure if Zack's
gonna be able to get
that steel hot enough to get
a proper quench.
‐ There's no time
to check my blade,
it's what I got right now.
‐ Five...four...three..
Two...one...
Bladesmiths,
shut down your machines,
drop your tools.
This first round of competition
is over.
‐ [laughs]
‐ High‐five, bro.
‐ Good job, Chris.
Good job, man.
♪ ♪
‐ Round one sucked.
[laughs]
I don't know if it's straight,
don't know if it's hard.
I'm banking on somebody else's
mistakes now.
♪ ♪
‐ Bladesmiths, the judges
have evaluated your work.
Six of you will move
into The Forge,
and one of you will be
dismissed.
Matt, David...
Secure your blades
and enter The Forge.
[ominous music]
‐ I thought I was road kill
right in the middle
of round one, so I'm just
kinda stunned I'm here.
‐ Chris, Aaron,
secure your blades,
enter The Forge.
♪ ♪
‐ I think I've proven
that I can measure,
but the game's not over yet.
You know, there's still lots
more to prove.
♪ ♪
‐ Marc, snag your steel.
‐ I absolutely feel like I can
make it onto the next round.
The flaws that are on my blade
shouldn't send me home.
I still have
a pretty good chance, yeah.
♪ ♪
‐ Zack, Rae, only one of you
can go through that door
and enter The Forge.
It's time for one of you
to leave this competition.
♪ ♪
Zack, unfortunately your blade
didn't make the cut.
Rae, secure your steel,
enter The Forge.
‐ I'm super excited to have
moved forward.
It means I'm closer to
redemption.
♪ ♪
‐ Zack you worked really hard,
and you should be proud
of what you did.
The only problem is,
it's the least refined blade
and watching the heat treat,
I can tell you right now
it's not fully hardened.
If a blade is properly
heat‐treated,
the file should skate
right off the edge.
[grating]
It's not skating at all.
‐ Okay.
‐ Zack, I don't know that
we've ever had a competitor
face greater challenges
than you faced.
Your tenacity
and stick‐to‐it‐ness
are something to aspire to.
But at this time we have to
ask you
to please leave The Forge.
‐ Pretty familiar feeling
to lose "Forged in Fire,"
so, uh, I'm right
at home here,
just a little sooner than
I expected.
I wish I could be
a "Forged in Fire" champion,
but wasn't in my cards.
Possible third time's a charm.
♪ ♪
[suspenseful music]
‐ Bladesmiths,
with six of you left,
we're gonna test the strength
and durability of your knives
by throwing 'em five times
each into this wall.
We wanna see how your weapon
performs as a throwing knife
and holds up to the impact.
Matt you're up first.
You ready?
‐ I guess I better be.
‐ You better.
‐ I actually don't mind going
first.
It's good because I get it
over with.
I hope it doesn't break.
♪ ♪
[clangs]
Ooh.
♪ ♪
[clangs]
[thuds]
♪ ♪
[clangs]
Oh.
[dramatic music]
♪ ♪
‐ Well, Matt, I'm looking
at the grain structure,
it's pretty tight,
so that should add some
toughness to it,
but obviously not enough.
You know, aside from that,
It's‐‐it was kind of needle,
a little bit difficult
to control the spin on it.
‐ Well, I'm road kill again.
‐ Matt, your blade broke on
the fifth and final throw.
That doesn't meant that
you're out of this competition,
because only one smith
will be eliminated
after these tests.
Each of you five
remaining smiths
will have to survive
five throws
in order to advance
in this competition.
So, let's get it started.
‐ Dave, you're up.
How you feeling?
‐ Good. For now.
[laughs]
♪ ♪
Matt's blade broke,
so I hope my blade stays
in one piece,
but anything can happen
when you throw a blade
really hard at a wooden wall.
♪ ♪
[clatters]
[clangs]
♪ ♪
[clanging]
‐ Well, David,
your knife held up well.
It's not perfectly balanced,
but the tip is in good shape.
Well done.
‐ Thank you.
‐ Rae, you're up.
You ready?
‐ Ready as I'll ever be.
♪ ♪
‐ I'm happy, I'm excited,
I'm slightly terrified,
all at the same time.
♪ ♪
[clangs]
[clanging]
♪ ♪
‐ All right, it's still in
one piece.
One very heavy piece.
Which made it a little bit
difficult to throw correctly,
but it held up.
So, well done.
‐ Thank you.
‐ Chris, you're up.
‐ Yep.
♪ ♪
After I finished making
my blade,
I wanted it to fly well
and perform well.
Right now, I just want it
to survive.
♪ ♪
‐ Very nice.
Nice.
[clangs]
♪ ♪
[clanging]
[clangs]
♪ ♪
[crashes]
You're good.
‐ Well, Chris, your edge,
your tip,
everything held up well.
It's all still in one piece,
but, more importantly, wow,
that's a nice looking
throwing knife.
Well done.
‐ Thank you.
‐ I mean, it's elegant,
it's sleek.
I'll take a set of three.
‐ Thank you very much.
‐ Aaron, you're up next.
You ready?
‐ I guess.
♪ ♪
It's show time.
I'm either going home
or I'm going to
the next challenge.
♪ ♪
[clangs]
[shudders]
♪ ♪
[clangs]
[shatters]
[groans]
♪ ♪
Well, that sucks.
[chuckles]
♪ ♪
‐ Well, Aaron, it broke
right at the pinch
where you bring in the blade
into the handle here.
That being said,
the grain structure in there
is beautiful.
That usually leads to
a very tough blade,
but with the ability
to overheat
and it gets some surface
cracking on there,
it can lead to a failure
like this.
‐ Yes, sir.
♪ ♪
‐ Aaron, your blade suffered
a catastrophic failure
after three throws
against the wall.
Matt, you'll be moving forward
in the competition.
Aaron, your fate lies in
the strength of Marc's blade.
Now, Marc will have to survive
three throws
in order to move forward
in this competition.
How you feeling?
‐ Tearing up, man.
‐ [exhales deeply]
God, it's bonkers, man.
Bonkers.
♪ ♪
[thud]
Ooh.
[clanging]
♪ ♪
[clears throat]
Marc, unfortunately
your blade suffered
a catastrophic weapons failure
on the very first throw.
I'm gonna ask you to please
leave The Forge.
♪ ♪
‐ I'm mostly upset because
I know
I can do better work.
The stuff I've turned in,
it's not as good as what
I could do.
I'm just so thankful
to be back
and hang out
with these amazing smiths.
This was an experience
of a lifetime again.
♪ ♪
‐ Bladesmiths, congratulations.
Your blades have survived
the strength test
and landed you
in the next evolution
of this multi‐tiered redemption
competition.
Now, we're sending you back
to your home forges
to make one of these.
♪ ♪
A chopper.
‐ Hmm.
‐ Your next challenge is
to forge a chopper
that is between 12
and 15 inches in length.
And now a word from somebody
who knows a little something
about choppers.
‐ There's a story about
a chef who liked to test
his cooks by having them
make a single perfect egg.
To make a perfect egg,
you have to learn
to master certain steps.
Well, this chopper is your egg.
Simple blade, simple handle,
put them together,
show us you're worthy
of redemption.
‐ Bladesmiths,
bring your A‐game
and make this chopper
your personal best.
‐ The chopper form is
simple enough,
but there are a lot of ways
to make bad choppers.
There's only a few ways
to make a good one.
[dramatic music]
‐ You'll have two days
at your home forges
in which to complete
this challenge.
After those two days,
you'll return,
and we'll test those choppers.
And one of you will be asked
to leave The Forge,
the other four will be
one mile further
along the road to redemption.
Good luck.
We'll see you in two days.
♪ ♪
[rock music]
‐ Last time I was back
in my home forge,
I was a finalist.
This time I've still got
four other people to beat out,
so there's a lot
of work ahead.
That is a big knife.
♪ ♪
I'd like to show the judges
that I know how
to make J.'s perfect egg.
I'm gonna make sure that
my weapon is stout, strong,
and sharp as heck.
I'm making Damascus today
to make it
not only functional,
but beautiful as well.
You just put a bunch
of layers together and fold it
over a couple of times
and suddenly you have
this really nice collection
of layers and texture
and color.
I've got my Damascus made,
now I'm gonna cut it
down the middle,
then marry it up
with my cutting steel,
start building a knife.
♪ ♪
‐ So far this road
to redemption is
rocky, and it's long.
We're not even
halfway through yet.
[roaring]
The challenge is
a competition chopper,
which is gonna be a hard one,
'cause those things get abused.
I'm using a steel called
80CrV2.
It's really tough.
Really important to get it
straight as you can
out of forging,
because you can you straighten
things with a grinder,
but you lose width.
Then you'll end up grinding
yourself a fillet knife,
when you meant to have
a chopper.
That's pretty straight.
♪ ♪
‐ Feels great to be back home.
The plan today is to build
a competition chopper
out of Damascus steel.
I've got 1080 steel and 15N20.
Now it's time to go tack,
weld it up,
and then we'll put it in
the forge.
This is the kind of knife
I like to make.
It's just
a fun, utilitarian knife.
All welded up.
Time for the forge.
♪ ♪
I'm hoping the Damascus
will help set me apart.
I am taking a risk
by making a Damascus.
It's just a chance for failure
if I have any kind of
buoyance cracks,
stress fractures,
things like that.
But I think it's worth
the risk.
Famous last words.
[laughs]
♪ ♪
‐ The material I am using is
farrier rasp.
Hopefully, I'm gonna get them
welded together
and then I'm gonna forge weld
them.
♪ ♪
Since I wasn't the first
one eliminated,
I need to prove to myself
that I can move forward.
[bleep]
My weld down on this end
didn't hold.
♪ ♪
I'm gonna have to start over.
So, this is a tough spot to be.
My goal by the end of today
was to have my blade quenched
and ready to be tempered.
It's up in the air right now,
but I'm gonna give it
all I got.
♪ ♪
‐ I'm back home,
here in North Carolina.
There are five remaining
smiths, and it's crazy.
But I am here to bring home
the "W,"
'cause I think that would be
amazing for small town
Hickory.
I'm sweating here doing it
old school
and moving this much steel
by hand is
no easy feat by any means.
My elbow is tired,
my forearms are tired,
and it's a lot of work.
But the day's not over,
and I'm ready to get
some work done
and make a beautiful blade.
♪ ♪
‐ Mostly good.
I'm gonna flatten these out
just a little bit.
This is coming along great,
but I find that I'm rushing.
♪ ♪
That's bad.
‐ So, I'm preparing
my Damascus side panels,
I had a ba
I hit it too cold and it just
cracked right in half.
Do I stick with this
and try to make it work?
Or do I just start over
with new Damascus?
I need to make a decision fast.
I've 7 inches
of side panel,
but I know that I'm working
three times as thick
as I want the finished knife
to be.
I think I can stretch this out.
See what happens.
Time's running out.
I just gotta get
to the finish line.
‐ I am happy with my progress,
forging went very well.
Now I'm getting ready to
grind it.
Grinding is probably
one of my strong suits,
so this is really where
I should shine.
Oh, [bleep].
Aw.
♪ ♪
Got a little unfocused,
just for a fraction of
a second
and I screwed up.
♪ ♪
I just twitched a little,
and I cut into my spine
just a little.
This is a simple blade,
but they want it to be perfect,
and so mine's gonna be
glaringly not perfect.
[groans]
♪ ♪
‐ For my handle construction,
I'm doing a full tang handle,
and I'm slapping on two pieces
of G10.
When all is said and done,
and I've got a finished blade,
it's gonna be fast and light
and hopefully hold up
to the test.
All right, I think it's time
to go quench.
I'm one step closer to
redemption
and looking good so far.
‐ [barking]
‐ My second attempt at welding
goes by smoothly and quickly.
And now I'm getting ready
to go back into the fire.
It's about to go into
this quench.
I hope I don't get a warp,
I hope I don't get a break,
I just hope everything goes
nice and smooth.
♪ ♪
[mellow rock music]
It's not quite at the hardness
I'd like.
One more good hit with the oil.
Time is flying by.
If I don't get it done,
I'm screwed.
♪ ♪
[rock music]
‐ I'm done forging now.
I've got roughly the profile
where I want it.
It's time to go to the grinder
and clean this bad boy up.
♪ ♪
All right‐y,
it's time to heat‐treat it.
♪ ♪
[whooshing]
It is perfect.
I've got this thing
definitely hard.
‐ It's straight, it's hard,
it looks fantastic.
♪ ♪
‐ Perfect straight.
[laughs]
I'm happy.
♪ ♪
‐ Unfortunately,
there's a little warp,
but that's not anything
I can't work around.
I'm not crazy concerned
about it.
♪ ♪
‐ I did quench.
I don't know.
It really didn't seem to
harden it.
Time is really running out.
This may just be the end of
the road to redemption for me.
[tense music]
♪ ♪
[thudding]
‐ Bladesmiths, welcome back.
You spent two days at home
building a chopper
that could bring you
one critical step closer
to redemption, the title
of "Forged in Fire" champion,
and a check for 20 grand.
Some of you will be moving
forward immediately
into the next round
of competition,
and one of you will have to
leave The Forge.
Now it's time to see how
those choppers hold up
as I hand 'em over to our own
badass, beserk‐y bladesmith,
J. Neilson.
‐ [laughs]
‐ J.
‐ Bladesmiths,
when you left here
I told you mastering
the basics
is the key to a good chopper.
Now let's see how well
you paid attention to that
with our ice block chop.
This test is gonna test
the overall strength
of your blade edge
and construction of your knife.
Matt, you're up first.
You ready?
‐ Yeah, gotta be.
‐ You're right.
♪ ♪
‐ I'm just ridiculously
nervous
about this whole thing.
Did I get the heat treat
right?
Is this blade gonna break?
Is it gonna bend?
I feel like I'm gonna pee
in my pants.
This whole thing is just
so nerve wracking.
♪ ♪
‐ [grunts]
[ice clinging]
[grunting]
♪ ♪
‐ Damn.
‐ Doesn't move.
‐ Nice.
‐ Matt, it was a nice piece,
very comfortable handle.
Started out straight,
still straight.
There's no edge damage at all.
You got one little cosmetic
defect,
but it didn't affect
the blade at all.
Very nicely done.
‐ Thank you.
‐ Dave, how you feeling?
Ready?
‐ Yes.
‐ Good, so am I.
♪ ♪
‐ I made my blade
from Damascus,
so there's always a point
of failure just because
you got
different metals
combined together.
I just don't want my steel
to break.
♪ ♪
‐ [grunting]
‐ Nice.
Nicely done.
♪ ♪
‐ Dave, it's nice piece.
‐ Thank you.
‐ But the handle is very, very
thin here,
and it's very forward heavy
as well.
Those combined, you saw,
the blade was going
round and round.
But everything stayed together,
good job.
‐ Thank you.
‐ Okay, Rae, you ready?
‐ Let's do this.
♪ ♪
There's a slight warp
in my blade.
Worst case scenario is
my blade
didn't harden properly
and it snaps in half.
I'm just hoping my blade
holds up.
♪ ♪
‐ [grunting]
‐ Phew.
‐ It worked. [laughs]
♪ ♪
‐ All right, Rae.
Your blade survived,
but you got a couple issues.
First of all, your handle,
biting the heck out of
my fingers.
You had a warp in your blade
before,
but now you've also got
a twist towards the front end,
and you've also lost the edge.
So, survived, but definitely
has issues.
Ready, Chris?
‐ I am.
‐ Let's go.
[whooshing]
‐ I'm nervous, I'm confident,
I'm hopeful.
But ice is
a really hard target,
and J. swings a knife
really hard.
♪ ♪
‐ [grunting]
[ice clinging]
‐ [laughing]
‐ Good job.
‐ Whoo, I got ice down
my shirt.
[laughter]
♪ ♪
Chris, nice job.
‐ Thank you.
‐ Couple issues, long handle,
it's very, very thin here
and a little too thick here.
You did lose a little bit
of edge here,
but the biggest thing is
your blade now goes this way.
Did a nice job on the ice,
though, and you did survive.
Good job.
‐ Thank you.
‐ How you feeling, Aaron?
‐ Nervous, but I feel okay.
‐ Good, I'm not nervous at all,
so let's just do it.
[laughter]
♪ ♪
‐ I'm freaking out.
I'm like, "Don't break,
don't break.
"Don't chip, don't warp,
'cause I really need this
thing to hold together."
Everything is on the line
right now.
Time to go.
‐ [grunts]
♪ ♪
[grunting]
‐ [exhales deeply]
♪ ♪
‐ Nice job, Aaron.
‐ Thanks.
‐ Handle's short,
not too short,
but right on that border.
Finger starts climbing up
into this section here
and it's a little bit sharp.
‐ Okay.
‐ But, it stayed true,
you still got an edge,
good job.
‐ Thank you.
Thank you.
[indistinct chatter]
The judges are
huddled up together.
They're doing evil whispers
to each other,
they're saying different
people's names.
I really hope they don't
choose my blade
for me to go home.
‐ This is the same problem
I had last time
I was on "Forged in Fire."
I did a lot of damage.
And I took damage.
I don't feel like
I've learned my lesson.
‐ Bladesmiths, the judges have
made a final decision
about who's moving forward
and who's leaving
this competition.
Now, these tests are designed
to be intentionally brutal
to set your blades apart
from one another.
I'll remind you, there is
no walk of shame in this forge.
Hold your head up high
when you walk out of here.
This is a brutal competition.
Nobody comes in here
and comes out unscathed.
♪ ♪
Matt, David, Aaron, Chris,
you'll be moving on.
You can go ahead and enter
The Forge.
♪ ♪
Rae, your blade didn't make
the cut.
It took the most damage
during this test.
For that reason
we have to ask you
to please leave The Forge.
‐ I don't think the judges
made the wrong decision.
My blade didn't hold up,
so my blade was the one to go.
But I made if farther
than I did last time,
which in itself is its own
form of redemption.
"Forged in Fire" has been
an amazing experience
and I'm just glad
that I had the opportunity
to be a part of it.
♪ ♪
‐ Bladesmiths,
congratulations,
you've made it to
the next level
of this competition.
Three smiths are already gone
and the long road to redemption
will only become rougher
and less familiar.
In this round of redemption,
you'll be making one of these.
♪ ♪